the whole world is waiting held hostage
by a virus so new to humans
we have no immunity to it we don't even
fully understand it
what could free us is a vaccine never
before hundreds of scientists all over
the world been focused on the same thing
at the same time creating a vaccine for
Koba 19 at every hour of every day
scientists in at least 21 countries from
the UK to Russia to China and Australia
and to Germany the United States and
here in Canada are toiling away at least
115 different teams of researchers and
though vaccine development cannot be
rushed speed is of the essence this is
an international race and Canada is in
the running there is only one way to be
certain a vaccine works test it on
humans
Eliza Granado a microbiologist is the
first to be injected with a trial
vaccine for Kovac 19 in Oxford England
I'm a scientist so of course I want to
try and support science the scientific
process whenever I can and since I don't
study viruses I felt a bit useless these
days though I felt like this is a very
easy way for me to support the cause
that's why I'm here scientists at the
Jenner Institute in Oxford are leading
the pack in what's become an accelerated
race for a safe and effective way to
inoculate the world and allow us out of
our bubbles they hope to have 6,000
people in this human clinical trial by
the end of May well I think everybody
agrees is the only way we're going to
get out of the lock down the social
distancing and really be able to still
have people protected as they go about
their daily life vaccines usually take
years not months to produce this is
happening at warp speed there's a
different urgency here in a pandemic
setting and so we're doing our phase one
the first in humans study with this
vaccine which will take place over the
next week or so and will immediately
roll into the next phase of the study
rather than waiting for a prolonged
period of time for all of the the
results over may months to come out all
vaccines expose the body to an antigen
that won't cause disease but will
provoke in a
immune response for many vaccine hunters
the key is the spiked protein it acts as
kind of a Trojan horse for the virus
bonding to human tissue and then
unleashing live virus molecules it in
theory attaches harmless material that
looks like the virus to the spike
protein essentially fooling the body and
hopefully stimulating an immune response
one that blocks or kills the virus as
soon as China released the genetic
sequence of the virus in January work on
vaccines began at least seven teams have
reached the first phase of human
clinical trials some using weakened or
inactivated parts of the virus some
using new entirely synthetic methods
nothing is guaranteed the pressure is on
definitely from my parents where they
asked me so Nadine did you do it today
do you have a vaccine for us keep trying
human clinical trials are now underway
in the UK the US Germany and China so
many potential vaccines it's possible
there could eventually be more than one
that works I think we're very optimistic
in our vaccines ability to be safe and
potentially effective this man lost a
close friend to kovat 19 and he
volunteered for one of two human trials
underway in the US you hear everybody
say this is the new normal I don't want
this to be the new normal I want this to
be an inconvenience and then we can get
back to normal in Canada this lab at the
University of Saskatchewan is on the
fast-track the vaccine and infectious
disease organization international
vaccine center or Vito inter vac was the
first in Canada to isolate the novel
coronavirus and it just got twenty three
million dollars in federal funding to
accelerate work on a vaccine we operate
one of the largest high containment
facilities in the world and that allows
us to work with viruses like a colon 19
virus dr. Gertz and his team are working
on what's called a subunit vaccine only
a very small part of the virus is
introduced into the body lowering the
chance of an adverse reaction we were
also the first lap in Canada to have an
model ferrets in this case up and
running we now also have developed a
second animal model hamsters and we are
one of the few organizations in the
world right now that actually have a
vaccine already in animal testing
testing in humans at this lab it's hoped
we'll start in the fall and then be
expanded if everything goes right Vito
could get emergency authorization for a
made in Canada vaccine as early as late
spring or early summer of 2021 that is
much faster than it normally is it can
take seven to ten years for a normal
vaccine to be developed for humans so
the 12 to 18 months that everybody is
talking about is really already a very
very fast accelerated way of doing it
researchers at at least five other
Canadian universities including Laval
are working around the clock to well
there is not that many lab in Canada
actually that are that the expertise to
develop vaccines and I have this
expertise dr. Denis LeClair and his team
are taking a different approach even
before this pandemic they worked with
using dead molecules from a plant virus
it's harmless to humans but still
triggers a strong immune response they
look like something dangerous but they
are not at all because they cannot
replicate and that's that's the idea
it's like a lure when you go fishing you
know you want to attract the the big
fish with this that's what we are doing
with it there is lots of collaboration
and lots of promise but it's only when
solid data from human clinical trials
emerges that we'll know if anyone has
created the Magic Bullet it can happen
polio is once one of the most feared
infectious diseases in the world
yearly outbreaks infecting millions
killing and crippling thousands of
children then in 1955 Jonas Salk
announced he'd come up with a vaccine
and cases of polio are now reduced by
99% the scramble now is to replicate
that with a vaccine for kovat 19 the lab
that seems closest right now is the one
in Oxford England if human trials here
are a success they say they could be
ready to administer millions of doses as
soon as this
Tambor personally I'm very optimistic
it's going to work
optimism and lots of hard work as the
world waits for science to get our lives
back to normal
with me now is dr. Steven Jones a
Canadian virologist who is a key figure
in the creation of a vaccine for the
Ebola virus developed by Canada's
national microbiology lab in Winnipeg he
is now in Saskatoon
dr. Jones thanks for joining us that
optimism from the Jenner Institute is
encouraging but correct me if I'm wrong
about this human clinical trials I think
fail far more often than they succeed
and the record for creating a completely
new vaccine is about four years so is 12
to 18 months for a kovat 19 vaccine
possible it's actually a really good
question
and I was surprised to hear that they
they feel that they would have a
candidate ready for use in September
that would be a remarkable achievement
and you're completely right
even the target of 18 to 24 months is
extremely ambitious we're essentially
two months through that timeframe so at
best 16 months away and again that's
really ambitious four years is a very
reasonable timeframe for development of
a new vaccine vaccines have been
extremely safe and effective public
health interventions because we go to
extraordinary lengths to make sure
they're safe and efficacious before
they're put into use we are essentially
giving something to someone who is at
the moment entirely well and the last
thing we can afford is for that vaccine
to have a reaction or to make disease
worse than would otherwise be which is
why we do human clinical trials we've
made vaccines of course for other deadly
deadly diseases including Ebola which is
what you were involved with but are some
viral diseases easier to make a vaccine
for than others yes they are bola was
difficult to work with primarily because
it is so dangerous to the people who are
using it and we had to work inside the
level 4 lab and use all of the special
biosafety precautions and that makes it
very difficult to use with coronal
versus the problem is slightly different
there's a certain amount of evidence
that coronavirus is when you're infected
actually produce quite relatively poor
and short-lived immune responses to
infection and you would normally inspect
expect the virus infection to produce
you know the best type of immunity is
the other problem with corona virus is
that during the response to both the
MERS outbreak in 2012 two to fourteen
and in the SARS outbreak we tried to
make vaccines and if the wrong type of
antibodies are produced then they can
actually make disease worse it's a
phenomenon called antibody enhancement
and it's something that at all costs we
have to try and avoid in the development
of a vaccine to this virus that's
comforting to know I mean I'm but on the
other hand deeply worrying is it
possible there is no vaccine for any
other corona virus I think from stars to
the common cold they don't exist so is
it possible that there might not be that
it might not be possible to create a
vaccine for cope in nineteen that it's
just a virus that's resistant to
vaccination yes it's possible I mean we
hope not but there's no reason to think
that it would be easy I mean it would be
absolutely awesome if we have a vaccine
in September it would actually be
incredible if we have a vaccine after
eighteen months that would be you know
an outstanding outcome as well we do
have to face the possibility that it
could be four years or or never until we
start to do this we're not going to know
how humans respond to these vaccinations
and it's important to know that not only
do they have to be safe but they also
have to induce neutralizing antibodies
antibodies which will stop the virus
from infecting cells and a lot of the
trials which are being used now are
using technologies which are in their
infancy I haven't been traditionally
used to make a lot of vaccines in the
past maybe one or two and and so we
don't know how well they'll work if it
is never if it's not possible to create
a vaccine for kovat 19 where does that
leave the world if you look at some of
the protect objections to which are out
right now
there's a reasonably good chance I think
it's almost certain that the there will
be another peak towards the fall it's
not clear how much the virus will
disappear over the summer normally an
influenza virus sort of drops right down
it isn't clear this virus will do that
but but we would anticipate a peak and
if we have successive phases of
increasing social distancing and
economic restrictions and then releasing
them you would anticipate that there
would be a series of potentially a
series of waves where more and more
people gradually get infected from the
virus we can hope that that will lead to
herd immunity without overwhelming the
the health system but hope isn't an
awesome strategy for dealing with a
outbreak like this so I think we do have
to believe that we can make a vaccine a
lot of very clever people are working on
it otherwise we could be in this
situation for at least two years maybe
more
[Music]